It's not just a preference, that's a necessity in terms of we need the acidity to break down
the pectin bonds and make the mucilage, like what we saw, we added that 2 pH and we just
immediately dissolved it.
So you also don't have to worry about that if you're not at that low pH, you're probably
not done fermenting because there's not enough acidity to make the mucilage dissolve.
Oh, okay.
So it's more like a signal that you've gotten there.
Yeah, it's a signal that you've gotten there.
You don't have to like try to get there.
You will get there and you're just, you know, your job I see or my job I see is just kind
of seeing how quickly I get there, when I get there, or sort of the conditions around
it.
But I'm not trying to like force any situation.
I'm not trying to like make it go there.
And that's the case for like for yeast, for lactate, for different types of fermentation?
Or does it vary depending on the type of yeast?
They're very dependent on the species, the identity of the microbes.
So because I work with a lot of different species, I'm not really able to say, "Oh,
I'm going to make a yeast."
I'm not able to say, "Oh, I'm going to make a yeast."
or does it vary depending on the type of bacteria?
They're very dependent on the species, the identity of the microbes.
So because I work with Saccharomyces, I know that that's their tendency.
So for other bacteria it was different, but you at least need that acidified environment to remove your mucilage.
So if you're not removing your mucilage, if you remember the picture before of your book,
of these tissue layers. If you're not, if you're not removing your
micellar, you're not getting those flavors into your fermentation anyway. So
you wouldn't want to wash it and pull it out because you haven't accomplished
like maybe the primary goal of getting flavors and you're not accomplishing
the goal of making it easy to wash and dry and like your workflow. So it affects
your workflow and you really haven't accomplished your primary goal. So it's
It's not like I would never look at a number
and make a decision based on a number.
Like, oh, my pH is 2.9, make a decision.
I would say, my pH is 2.9, what does my coffee feel like?
What does it smell like?
What does it look like?
Plus the pH of 2.9, now I make a decision.
- Got it.
- So numbers are difficult that way.
They're very helpful, but they can be very tricky
because maybe my pH meters aren't calibrated.
definitely don't make a decision based on your pH meter. It's way more likely that your pH meter is
uncalibrated. I really go by feel, smell, touch, sounds. Yeah. Is it possible to have a fermentation stall in
wine and coffee? Yeah. It is definitely possible to have it stall. It's less of a problem in coffee
than it is in wine because in wine the fermentation is so much longer. So you have 30 days where
or something can go wrong in your fermentation.
And in coffee, if you're only fermenting for 24 hours,
there's less of an opportunity for something to get in the way.
But in wine, a fermentation usually stalls
because your yeast get either too toxic--
so it went too fast, they made too much alcohol,
and the yeast poisoned themselves, and then they die.
And then you're really in trouble,
because now you have to start it again, starting
in a really toxic place.
And so you have to be very gentle.
You have to restart your culture of your yeast.
You have to acclimate them slowly
to get to that toxic point.
And then you reintroduce them.
It's a huge, huge problem, a huge time
set in the wine industry to have a stuck fermentation.
And it happens a lot.
So in coffee, we don't have that problem.
Again, our fermentations are shorter.
We have less time.
And we don't start with as much sugar.
So a wine fermentation, a juice, will
start at breaks of 24-25. That's a lot of sugar. That in and of itself is very toxic.
Really high sugar environments are toxic to a lot of microorganisms. That's why honey is anti-bacterial.
Honey, it's so much sugar that you think, oh, that's so much fuel, but actually it's toxic
so a lot of things don't grow in honey, and can.
I didn't smell any alcohol here. Is that because there's no alcohol or because it's so diluted?
It's pretty diluted. There is some amount of alcohol in there. You'll probably get like 2-3%.
But at that level, it's also very volatile. So when we're mixing, every time Zaoistan is mixing, some of that alcohol is volatilizing.
And very little is in your coffee. You're not going to get alcohol in your coffee.
It's not a concern.
What happens when you do, I've had one where it was obviously alcoholic.
What is that?
So it's not like ethanol that is going to affect you because that would be burned off in your roasting as well.
It's the characteristics of something that's like rum flavor or like some liquor, some alcoholic beverage.
So it's more like the sensory attributes of that alcohol but not like ethanol that would actually make you drunk.
So yes, you can get boozy flavor notes, but it's not ethanol booze.
So today we found that the moonfish is almost gone.
What happens if we just put some sugar in the sugar to shine?
Yeah, you can kick start it. So if you noticed, it was still very active.
I'm still very happy with the level of bubbles and the level of activity that we saw in the fermentation.
But it is a little bit less than yesterday around this time.
Part of it I think is the temperature.
Like you just had a cool night.
So it just kind of had a chance to rest.
So maybe at lunch time we'll see it perk back up.
But if you don't see it perk back up,
and let's say for some reason you have a goal.
I'm not here to judge you.
If you have a goal of I want a five day fermentation.
And now it's day two and you see this low activity,
I would feed it.
I would give something, some fruit juice, some vanilla, something that you have around
if you're like, "I need to make it to the end."
I would definitely try to feed my fermentation some amount of sugar source so that it can
last for another three days.
And when you say low activity, like how would you, how would someone be able to detect that?
It's a little bit more individual, so it's sort of your experience.
experience like it's low activity for me like my standard of low activity
because I've seen so many fermentations so it's something that you kind of have
to have more experience and say what is low for each person. It's an individual.
It's like a visual cue or multi-period? I would say it's both. Not only is it visual because you can see the
bubbles but you can also a lot of the times of fermentation you can hear it.
It's popping a lot of those bubbles so you have that clue as well and how much kind of
of aromatics are coming off of the fermentation,
coupled with how quickly is my pH dropping?
Is my pH just staying the same?
Is every single measurement exactly the same?
That's another indication.
But again, maybe my pH is exactly the same
and it's stalled and it's not moving,
it's not moving, it's not moving,
but I'm still seeing visual activity.
I'm still seeing a lot of bubbles
and I'm seeing a lot of, yeah, signs of life.
I'm not gonna get worried yet.
If I have both, if I have no sense of life and no movement, that's when I would decide if I'm going to wash my coffee or I'm going to feed it, I'm going to try to restart it, maybe I'm going to try to heat it up, maybe it's too cold.
If you do something like a big tank, how are you going to mix that?
So I've shown some pictures where you get in the tank, I got the workers put on boots and you get in and you're shoveling it all around so all the big sugar pools, you have to get inside of it.
I think Caleb's already designing a mechanical arm that's going to mix the tank.
Heat and mix, potentially.
So yeah, mixing is a big part of it.
Because even in the small one, you saw the temperature.
You felt the temperature difference.
The top, the sides, the middle.
That happens very easily.
So mixing is important to homogenize the temperature
and to spread the yeast to maybe parts of the coffee that have more food than others.
Yeah, because in Thailand, I mean, before that, we just have to put the lock on the lid and just rolling the...
I like that method. If you're doing in barrels and you're able to close it and you can roll it.
Yeah, but it's so heavy.
Yeah, it's heavy.
This could be something that you could maybe use from the wine industry because, you know, wine is aged in barrels and the barrels need to be washed.
So the way that they wash the barrels is they pick up these barrels on their side, they put them on these wheels, and you have the hose that goes into the hole, the balloon hole, goes up there and then it washes the barrel from the inside.
And so you have these, kind of like a platform with wheels that is constantly rolling the barrel.
So you could reconfigure a wine barrel washer to be a coffee mixer.
I love the idea of a cement mixer as a tank.
Something that's dipped and that's constantly agitating,
slowly, not like a large rotation,
but something that's slowly moving the coffee,
I think would be really helpful,
instead of like the three times a day that we're doing,
just having some of that contact.
Because then you could also, I think,
have even less liquid,
because you're constantly moving that mass.
So you concentrate the flavor a little bit more.
If we have to open the lid and mix like this, is there any disadvantage or any downside?
The huge downside, the biggest downside to all of this opening and mixing is contamination.
Every time I open it and my paddle is not clean, all the contamination we did with our own hands,
sticking it in there, every time I'm putting my pH meter, my thermometer, all of these things,
there's a chance for contamination.
So, do as I say, not as I do. Best practices, spray with alcohol, like a bottle of alcohol before you go into your fermentation.
If you're trying to protect your, if you're trying to protect like your mouth.
Maybe you're not, maybe you're just trying to bite, whatever. Maybe.
So, something that we've talked a lot with Julie about is this idea of newer regions of coffee that don't have a strong history of coffee or a strong history of cacao,
So, when I was working in California and was working with coffee, their fermentations,
nothing was happening.
Because coffee hasn't been grown in California very well.
So they didn't have these microbes coming in and the fermentation was stalled and they
were getting more like decomposition.
And you were telling me about cacao in Hawaii not having a very, I'll let you say it.
Yeah, so all the farmers that are starting to grow cacao, it's like a very, very new
crop mentality.
And so, it's not a very good crop.
It's not a very good crop.
I'll let you say it.
Yeah, so all the farmers that are starting to grow cacao,
it's like a very, very new crop in Hawaii.
And they're having a really hard time getting fermentations going
because their microbial load is really low.
And they've had this very big question mark over their minds.
Why isn't our cacao fermenting?
Whereas if you go to Ecuador or all of these mature growing regions,
you don't even have to have a big mass.
You can grow it in a bucket and it just starts bubbling away.
So I showed them Lucy's podcast, which is super cool,
just to try to get them on the right direction on maybe
what kind of research they should come in and focus on.
Same concept.
So in that situation in Hawaii, maybe you
want as many people as possible coming
to touch somebody who's harvesting your papayas
and pineapples to come and touch your cacao as well.
So there's not any one best practice.
It's like, what are we trying to achieve in these places?
We may need to have some of this, you know, lax hygiene to just build up that mass.
And then in more established places, where it's been growing a long time, now it's really
important for us to have hygiene and to like clean our paddles and to clean our equipment
and to not have everybody touching our coffee.
And a very common practice in Africa
is to just get in with your feet.
And you can move with your bare feet.
It's like we were doing with the buckets
yesterday, how you were physically rubbing the coffee
to get the mucilage off.
Well, a lot of times, it's easier
to do with your feet in the big tanks.
So that's inoculating.
That's kind of giving a flavor of the coffee.
And if the two bags run out, and our yeast starts to die,
I mean, how can we know that and what's going to happen next?
What's going to happen next?
OK, that's a really great question.
So if your sugar is completely depleted,
and we know sugar is the yeast's favorite source of food,
then what happens next if you're going to keep
going on your fermentation?
So as the yeast are consuming sugar,
they're giving off all of these other metabolites.
They're creating organic acids.
They're creating those esters and thiols and carbon dioxide.
So there's, remember we didn't sanitize, right?
So there's still other microbes there.
We've out-competed them, we've dominated them,
we've kind of put them uphold.
But as soon as this opportunity opens up,
like it's a window, it's an ecological window,
where now the yeast is dying,
so it's not taking up this space.
Their food is gone, they've made all of this acid,
they've made all of this citric acid, for example.
Then there's some lactic acid bacteria there
that's gonna eat that citric acid
and then have its own fermentation.
So now you can have it be bacteria dominated.
[INAUDIBLE]
So even if your yeast are dead, you're
still going to have microbial activity of some other kind.
You've opened up this opportunity.
So we did talk about this yesterday, right?
You saw this picture?
So this is an idea that I really want
break in our vocabulary talking about over fermentation, talking about this idea that
it's linear and that it's time dependent. So that's my problem with the word over because
it implies some relationship of time where we're okay at some point, we're okay, we're
okay, we're okay, and suddenly we went over. There's a point at which we have ruined our
And I don't think that's true.
Also from experience, I've had coffees that have been fermented 400 hours that taste very
clean, very lovely, that are just balanced and great.
So I think that's a good thing.
And I think that's a good thing.
And I don't think that's true. Also from experience, I've had coffees that have been fermented 400 hours and taste very clean, very lovely, that are just balanced and great.
And I've had coffees that were processed in 12 hours and are just nasty and have some overripe fruit that have these characteristics.
So it's not to do with time.
Instead, I want you to think about fermentation as this kind of global map.
And you can take these many different roads.
And so you can start out--so number one down here is kind of the traditional sense,
where each of these rings is time.
So you can have 24 hours, 48, 72, and at some point we pass into this red defect area.
That's traditionally what we thought.
And then number two is the one I described where you can immediately get into the defects.
You can immediately get contaminated and it doesn't have to do with time.
It's just the microbes that are there that you will immediately have a defect situation.
Or you can be blissful in this section three where maybe you sanitize, you are really careful
about cross-contamination, you've inoculated, and then you can just go on this really lovely
path for a very, very long time and not have a defect.
So all of these are possible.
So instead of talking about over-fermentation,
I think we should talk about what we mean.
What are the defects that we're actually tasting?
Are we tasting something boozy?
Are we tasting something with rotting fruit?
Are we tasting ethyl alcohol, like male alcohol, for example?
Are we tasting vinegar?
So let's name the defect that we're tasting instead
of just saying over-ferment.
Because that can mean different things to different people
And it's also not a correct way to think about fermentation.
And it keeps producers feeling really uncomfortable in fermentation.
All my life I've been told over-fermentation is bad.
Why do I want to ferment for a long time?
So our language is really getting in the way of, I think, some progress in this sense.
And one of the things that came up, Valeria, because she's so bright,
she said, "Well, look at what you did with number two.
Does that mean that if number two had kept going, it could have been saved?"
in this yellow zone, it could have been rescued.
And I think so.
I think this is also a possibility.
A little bit with what we talked about with Cecil,
where you had your power go out,
you had all of this fruit sitting there,
and you were headed in this path to defect city,
which is why you gave your property away,
'cause you said, "I don't know what to do with this."
And you didn't know when the power was gonna be back,
and it could be a lot longer.
So he was in defect city.
But he would maybe potentially wait.
He would put the coffee in water, lower the temperature.
And then when the power was back two days later,
he pulped it and did something fast like a citric.
With more time, this defect could have headed into saving.
You could have kind of like swerved the car
and headed in a different direction, potentially.
So it's not that--
but that does take a little bit more skill.
So that's not for beginners or faint of heart
to say, how am I going to right this ship?
But it's possible, I believe.
So I want fermentation to be thought
of as kind of this roadmap.
You're saying, what path am I going to take?
And thinking about safe fermentations
and risky fermentations, or undesirable fermentations.
Much better than just over-fermentation.
Undesirable, positive, safe fermentations.
Does this make sense?
this concept of we're all going to stop using over-fermentation?
[LAUGHTER]
So along those terms of vocabulary
and how we name things, this is another term
that is very overused and poorly understood--
double fermentation.
And we barely understand fermentation,
but we're so willing to be like, double, triple fermentation.
So this came from the process in Kenya,
where the way that they process coffee in Kenya
is pulping, they don't do naturals,
they pulp the coffee, and they do a dry,
meaning an unsubmerged fermentation in a tank.
And this was the way that they did it for a very long time,
and then they would go wash the coffee and set it to dry.
Well, one season, there was just way too much coffee,
they had a really big problem,
and they didn't have enough patio space,
and they couldn't dry the coffee at a good rate.
So in order to buy time, to pause, to gain time,
they decided to wash the coffee and submerge it in water
because this is a preservation method.
So now they added this extra step,
it's putting it in the fridge.
So we're just gonna wait until the patio's disoccupied
and then we're gonna move forward.
And then at the end of the season
when all those coffees were cupped,
they're like, they taste brilliant and amazing
and they taste really good, now we're going to make this the standard instead of like the emergency plan.
Like this is what we're going to do all the time because we think the coffee is better.
And this nomenclature comes from the time when we thought everything that happens in a tank is fermentation
and everything that happens outside of a tank is not.
So before it was honeys and naturals and patios had no fermentation and only washed coffees had fermentations.
And now we know that's not true because we understand microbes.
And we know that all of the other methods also have fermentation.
But then they said, well, this submerged in water is also a fermentation
because it's happening inside the tank.
So, like, anything that is tank-related is a fermentation.
So they said it's a double fermentation,
even though the point of this first part is to build up flavors.
And the point of this is to stop.
The goal in this submerged is to do nothing.
It's to just stop time and be able to go onto the patio.
Now that doesn't mean that nothing is happening here.
We've talked a little bit about, we have all this moisture,
the seed has been liberated, it doesn't have the exocarp,
so it is potentially available to germinate.
There is some evidence that these seeds are pre-germinating,
or starting that process.
So it's not that they're completely inert, but it's not a fermentation. Whatever is happening is something else.
Well, the goal of this, what they did there was they washed it all before.
So it's not like they took this coffee and then just added water.
They washed the coffee very thoroughly as much as they could and then they put it in water.
So I'm not saying that they could reach 100% perfect cleanliness, but they want it to.
Their goal is to reach 100% cleanliness, so that there isn't any more activity here.
[INAUDIBLE]
If they did?
Yes.
So you're not talking about this.
You're saying somebody else--
Yes.
--took their coffee, washed it, put it back in the tank.
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah, so you could restart another fermentation.
You could do this, have your clean parchment,
put it into another tank, add more mucilage.
But that's the key.
You have to add something.
You have to add some kind of pool to keep going
or to have more of an impact.
But isn't it stressful for the seed?
I mean, if you like, start the process,
and then you restart the process,
it's not like immediately you have to wash it.
I think it is stressful for the seed
to have all of this manipulation.
I think when you also think about scale,
and you think about either these big containers
and all of the weight of the ones on top
and the pushing down on the ones on the bottom.
So any type of additional processing
is additional physical stress.
It's just sheer strength forcing this delicate structure,
which I think has a lot to do with longevity and storage
of these coffees while germ, which is really hard to measure
because most people process, sell their coffee,
you cup them, it gets an 86 and you're like, great, let's go.
And not very many people, unless you're the roaster,
being aware of, I've had this coffee for six months
and it's been changing.
There's not that immediate feedback.
So a lot of that stress, you're not
And so, you're not going to be able to notice right away. And that's why these highly processed coffees puff really well, and then they fall. And then they faint. And then they just kind of...they don't maintain.
But initially, you're not going to notice that. So a lot of the producers don't have the feedback to like, maybe calm down a little bit. Or maybe be a little bit more gentle.
Because it puffs really well, so then they're more excited to do more. And so then you have these like...
Nico gave me the term of "Brutalist fermentation."
So you just put through all of these steps and put through the ringer.
And so many where they take the cherries, and they put them on the bed, and they dry them perfect, and they re-soak them, and they put them again.
I read a process that was like five cycles of that.
From tank to bed, from tank to bed, and all of these additional...
And again, it makes sense.
They don't know, because no one's ever told them,
or the researchers are not able to cup their coffee 18 months
later, that this is connected.
So it's like the feedback cycle is broken.
So that one, the slide was, did they just take it out of the--
there's no resilage on there.
They took it out of the tank where they had patio space,
and they just set it to dry.
So traditionally, yes, there was tank space.
But after they did this experiment-- not experiment,
it was just an emergency.
It was a tree accident.
It was an accident.
They're like, we don't have space.
Then they cupped it.
Because Kenya does have a really good system
of their auction system of cupping all of their copies
and having that feedback to producers.
It's a very unique buying system that Kenya has.
So they were able to give producers feedback
immediately and say, everybody, we're changing the process.
This is what you have to do.
and it works out really well.
So for me, this method also, in this dry fermentation,
you have much higher heat, more intensity.
So I think part of the reason why it made the coffee better
is not that this--
so a lot of people talk about the soap improving the coffee.
It makes it better.
I don't think this step is additive.
I think this step corrects for any defects that
were produced in the first part.
So I think in the first part, you're
building all of these towers of molecules,
and some of them are very intense in one direction.
And then having this submerge can either
pull out some of those concentrations,
even out the lot, and then you have this less bad.
It's not improving it, it's just making it less bad.
- But they take it right from the submerge,
now take it right from the submerge tank
and put it out to dry.
- Correct.
- So they don't do an additional--
- It depends, if they don't have space,
I've seen places that'll do like a three-soak cycle.
Take the water out, put fresh water,
take it out and then put fresh water up to like three cycles
which is insanely water intensive.
- Yeah.
- I can't, like these countries, I can just like do that.
Like just swimming pools of water
just to process their coffee.
But I think that's part of it,
this method that oh, soaps make it better.
Not understanding what a soap is doing.
The water is able to pull out molecules,
It's not adding anything back to the coffee.
- So it's more like safety.
- Safeness.
It's a safety measure, yes.
- I think what everybody, I don't know,
at least what I've been told is
this is a really huge factory in South Africa,
it was in Charlottesville.
They pump it, they soak it for like 24, 48 hours
in the trains, just to soak the moustache.
Then they leave it to go through the channels to wash it,
just because the moussache is soft enough.
And through the channels it's just being washed
and then they put the clean parchment
and they're ready to try it.
Then right now, for example, in Ethiopia,
it's getting most popular, this dry fermentation.
It's again like 12, 24, up to 48 hours.
So they leave it, as you see in the picture, dry,
just to get a bit extra boozy.
No, no, no, I mean, it's not a boozy flavor.
It's just like, you know,
you twist a bit the volume of the flavors
and then they do the same.
They just basically, I think they're gonna skip
the submerging part of the thing
and they're just gonna wash it through the channels.
And that's basically it.
- In India?
- Yeah, but about the dry,
that's actually a question of what is,
what is the thing better?
So you just keep it dry, like this, 12, 24 hours.
And then submerge it, and then wash it through the channels,
or just wash it straight away.
- Well, so this is a difficult part with Kenya,
because it's some of the best coffee in the world,
and I really enjoy Kenyan coffees,
and I'm not gonna sell them if their method is wrong.
But for me, it's like, this came out of necessity.
So the dry soap, you're building up these flavors,
potentially some defects,
And then you have a second step of removing the thing that you made in the first place.
So the reason I like to work with the yeast is because I get to do both at the same time.
So instead of these two discrete separate steps, I combine them into one so that we're
using, we're inoculating with yeast to build up the flavors, but I've submerged the whole
time so I have that homogeneity.
So I'm not saying that it's a better method.
I'm saying that I think that this method clearly was made out of necessity, but I think we
to accomplish most of the same thing.
I'm not saying I can make a Kenyan-style coffee,
but I'm saying what we're doing with the submerged fermentation
is trying to collapse both of these steps
to just do it once instead of doing it twice.
So the question is, what do I think is better?
Well, it depends what you're trying to accomplish.
My method, where you collapse them both,
is maybe not better if I don't have enough space.
Maybe it is better to put it in two steps
so that I make my process longer so that I can
have enough space in my patio.
So I actually never think about, or rarely
do I think about flavor when I think about what's best.
I think about my workflow.
I think, how much space do I have?
Who's here to work?
What time of day is it?
I don't make decisions based on flavor.
I make decisions based on people, personnel, weather,
and everything else.
So sometimes this would be a much better method
if there's no space.
But if I have space, I can collapse it.
Cecil, you had a question?
Enhances in color, would it be in a different way?
What enhances the color?
When you soak the paint.
Enhancing meaning like making it...
More blue or blue-green or more intense?
I haven't heard that. I would think that it may enhance the color.
Enhance again, not by making it better, but either by taking out some of that dye
where we see some that are a little bit more reddish and pinkish on the outside
you could get a little bit more of a visually cleaner look. I think that's also fries, but I
don't know if it makes like the green seed more of a blue. I haven't heard of anything.
No, I looked at the products and they can show you.
Okay, cool. So this part is really just to talk about nomenclature, right? So like we're already
not that solid on fermentation and we're all ready to jump in and say double.
And this could, there's an argument for this being a double fermentation, where you're
doing it in cherry, so maybe a three day fermentation in the cherry, you pulp it, and then you ferment
your parchment.
That could also be a double fermentation, because you are acting on two different steps.
So I have no problem with somebody saying this is a double fermentation.
But these two methods are very different.
But you could still use the same label for them.
So could it technically call like, we could call our coffee double fermentation because it came in the truck and carried for a day and then we just start fermenting it again?
Exactly. Another way that you could use double fermentation is even just in a regular natural where you have a phase of bacteria dominant, you have one type of fermentation, and then you have another phase that's yeast dominant, this could also be a double fermentation.
- Everything's a double fermentation.
- Almost, yeah.
- Essentially.
- Right, essentially.
So the point is also it's a completely meaningless term.
And I don't know if we're doing ourselves a service
or our consumers a service by using this term
that is very diluted and means nothing.
And the whole point is these three coffees
would taste very different.
So if you're a consumer trying to buy a coffee
that you're like, oh, I tried this one double fermentation
that I liked, you may never find that flavor again
because everyone has their own definition.
And the point is, all of these would be correct
as double permutations.
So for me, naming things by the process
is not very helpful.
It's more of an intellectually fun exercise,
but it's not helping producers
because it's kind of putting them into these boxes
of you have to make these processes.
And it's not helping consumers
because they're just confused.
They're like, "I want to buy a thing that I know I like."
So I'm like, "Who are we doing this for?"
It's a very unhelpful, I think, part of the industry.
So basically, only natural is one fermentation.
Only what?
Only natural is like one fermentation.
Well, no, because this is a natural.
This is a dry process.
And it is a double, because it's first the bacteria and then
the yeast.
And the way that Julie is doing hers,
She has a wet, a submerged cherry portion of her naturals
and then it goes to drying.
So she definitely has either different microbe dominance
at different phases and different literal phases
of a wet and a dry.
So she could name her coffee a natural,
'cause it is, it dried in cherry.
She could call it a hydro natural
because it had a phase of water.
She could call it a submerged hydro natural.
you could call it a double hydro natural,
she could call it a super natural.
All of them are correct, but how helpful are they?
(audience member speaking)
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah.
As long as you have that moisture.
And what we saw here, too, is that even
So even at very little water activity, very little moisture content, these yeast and bacteria are still, most of the yeast are still alive and it's very slow.
It's very slow. But they're still active, they're still metabolizing, they're still doing something.
And can you say, if I say for more, we put all these things up, can you like dry them the first few days?
A lot of yeast and anything still on them?
That's the, I think, main benefit of the inoculation process that Julie does, is that cherry, this is, so this is the cherry from Giba in Uganda.
the cherry in a high moisture content just coming in from the field, left alone to its own devices.
This is all of this mold that grows up. So doing nothing gets you all of this mold. What she's doing
is she's actually using the yeast in that fermentation. So wherever we have the yeast,
we don't have the mold. So she's using the yeast as a bio control. So it's like wherever the yeast is,
it's like I have my table, my reservation, I brought all my friends, like no one else can sit here.
spots are taken. It doesn't mean the mold's not there. It's like just these spots are taken.
So her coffee doesn't look like this.
Even though she's doing the same thing. She's doing a high moisture cherry, several day
contact.
I'm going to say to your point on double fermentation.
Yeah.
[ Inaudible ]
>> Exactly.
We're trying to overcomplicate what is happening.
The cow has a much more distinct bacteria-dominated phase,
acetic acid bacteria-dominated phase, and an yeast phase.
It's a very clearly marked by temperature, even the most traditional basic producers
know this part of it, but we don't try to separate out.
It's just fermentation.
Because to have a successful one, you need that rise of one and then the other
to get to your final point.
So they think of it as one unit, and in coffee we're trying to parse it out
and sound really cool.
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah, that's good.
I thought we should pick it up as soon as possible
after picking it.
We've already picked it and pointed
with it in seconds if we can.
So what does that mean for all the dates?
So what Cecil is saying is about--
the recommendation that you've had
is to pick and pulp as soon as possible
and to not have any time in sharing.
So he's asking, where does that fit in in this scheme?
my preferred method for washed coffees, because any of that time is just something that's
hard to reproduce. So it's not that it's going to damage your coffee, it's not that it's
going to be bad, but my goal is reproducibility. Kind of like a promise to your customer, like
"I made this thing that you like, and I can do it again." And the way to keep that promise
is to control as many variables. Now, if you have a customer that's like, "I made you this
do this one-of-a-kind thing that you can never have again, and you value that, then you would
keep it in sharing longer, try to do some of these acrobatics, and then give them something
that is ephemeral. So there's also value to that. I'm not saying there's not. I'm just
saying, like, what are you trying to do? Do you want consistency, or do you want a uniform?
And if you want consistency, bulk as soon as possible, control your fermentation, dry,
So this is to that point of fermentation consistency.
This is a graph I made up.
This is not a study.
This is something I like Googled.
But the idea, just to convey the idea that a traditional wild fermentation,
if you remember the graphic of the hands with the coffee,
and it just has all the rainbow colors, all the microbes,
So, you know, it's a lot of different things. And I think that's what's so interesting about
And I'm like, "Okay, I'm going to do this."
different microbes that are just waiting for their opportunity.
It's one degree cooler, this one's going to dominate.
It's a little more pH, this one's going to dominate.
It's a little bit more sugar, this one's going to dominate.
What we did with the lactic, so I just
kind of made that a hue blue.
There's just like only blues, only lactic acid bacteria,
but there's still 50,000 different lactic acid bacteria
that are going to be acting.
So now your variability is less, but you're still
going to have variability. You're still going to have a little bit of inconsistency, but you've controlled it a little bit.
What we're doing with the yeast is we have a clone. We have just one identity, one microorganism that's going to dominate and ferment my coffee.
That's why in the beginning of the season when it's not that ripe, in the middle of the season when I have a lot, at the end of the season when I have more overripes,
when it's hot and sunny, when it's cold and there's a bunch of rain, all of these different conditions,
my coffee is still going to hit the mark. It's going to be really consistent because I'm dominating my fermentation.
And the point isn't that your coffee should always taste the same, but what we were talking about in the previous group
is that it's just a tool. Maybe you have one coffee that is particularly troublesome. You have one coffee that just
And it's not like, "Okay, now I'm a yeast person and I can use yeast on everything." or "I'm a purist, I'm a naturalist, I can't use yeast on anything. Everything is pure from the farm."
It's just a tool to say, "Where do I need this?"
Maybe you have just one customer that says, "I would love to buy more of your coffee, but I need it to be an 84, and I will buy a 15-year-old."
Just do it with that.
And maybe you have another customer that says, "I just want 10 bags of something weird this year."
So it's just like figuring out where it fits.
I think too often people are just like, "Oh, that's not for me, because I need this other thing."
And it's like, well, it can--it isn't for everybody, but it can definitely fit in some--in
some places.
So we talked about this standardization, this like kind of flattening of the variability
could be really terrible for--I think it was John Marko's example.
He was a small producer.
He went to the effort to plant ten different varieties, and he keeps them separate, and
he marks how many cells in that variety.
And if you use the same yeast on all of his varieties, he may have a dampening of that difference.
Which doesn't really help him, because he might put the trouble on all of his varieties.
But if you're a mill, getting coffee from all corners of the world, and you're trying to make ten containers of consistent coffee to sell to somebody,
It's helpful that this dampens all of that variability and that you don't have so many different sharp edges.
Yeah?
So, would you say, if they would, for example, monitor during the harvest,
before they would put one vine to the supply point because it's in the system,
and then they would decide, "Okay, so since March, April,
we have no weather and we might want to put a few more in the back kitchen
and use this to get better results in the future?"
I like that idea of being very targeted, of saying,
know this particular variety doesn't behave as well or maybe this part of the season. Maybe it takes a while to ramp up.
Like in the first two months it's just not quite there yet. By peak or end of the season it does really well.
Giving it kind of like that head start.
[inaudible]
Traditionally, Blue Mountain Tarpon is considered a real wonderful.
It has to be. Because you only know what you picked after Christmas.
Only what you picked after Christmas.
For Christmas, it was considered limited.
Wow!
When did that change?
Politics.
People wanted more coffee.
People coming into the market
and they would
extend the orders lower and lower
so they could get more coffee
and probably more tea.
No, that's okay. So that's really interesting
because it's the idea that
there's a standard to uphold
and knowing that earlier picked, earlier seasoned
season coffee doesn't quite make that mark. So putting a limit to producers to say only
after this date, only after Christmas when it's like peak season can you harvest and make what
we would deem blue mountain worthy. But if you have other tools to say well how do we get this
earlier season to behave more like peak season, then you have more options, you're not.
And they blend as well.
Blend the beginning, the end.
You know, try and get the beginning of the end.
Healthy after Christmas, I love that.
I heard a similar thing in Colombia that they, for a very, very long time,
wouldn't allow any naturally processed coffee to be exported at all
because they wanted to maintain the Colombian washed profile.
Just like Kenya.
Kenya has a reputation for being very controlling of what makes it out with the Kenya label.
Which, in a way, helps producers because you have a high esteem of the country or the region,
and then it also hurts producers because it limits creativity, growth, innovation, autonomy.
This is the idea of, okay, we can have historical starters that are decades old, so how long
can we reuse the yeast?
This is a sourdough starter that you can have for a very long time or even a commercial
that you can continually feed.
And what I want to share is the difference between these starters and then what we're
doing with our yeast packet, our commercial yeast, and why they're different and why you
can't just keep it forever or even a long time.
And we talked a little bit about the yeast, and I'm going to talk a little bit about the
yeast.
So, the yeast is a very important part of the process.
It's a very important part of the process.
commercial yeast, and why they're different, and why you can't just keep it forever, or even a long time.
And we talked a little bit about it before with like your sourdough, like your goal is the rise and the bubble and the carbon dioxide production,
which is a primary metabolism. The yeast will do that no problem. But we don't want just that primary metabolism.
I mean, unless we do, which is, I just wonder what we'd be using it for.
I'm going to use a brand new one. I'm going to use a brand new one. I'm going to use a
I would use, you know, the yeast from the grocery store, like, or bread.
If you just want to remove the yeast, you could do that for three cents.
If you want to buy SEMA or Intenso or any of these other whinies, you want them for
the secondary intact ones.
You want it for the fruity components.
You want it for the organic acid production.
You want that part of it.
And that part of it is what you're going to use.
We want it for the fruity components.
We want it for the organic acid production.
We want that part of it.
And that part of it gets tired.
So, I was showing this idea of like, living things get old.
You can't expect a living thing to just be the same constantly.
So, if you want a tree, if you just want like the shade of a coffee tree,
then you can have a coffee tree for a hundred years because it will keep making leaves.
You will have leaves and you will have branches.
And if that's your goal, keep your trees.
But if you want peak fruit production, if you want that tasty fruit, you have to replant.
You have to get that new generation if you want that part of its biology.
So, if you just want mucilin removal, we can do starters for a very long time.
But if you want to hit that target the way that we are trying with the yeast,
You gotta make a fresh batch. You gotta get to eating new.
Because the yeast will only do that secondary metabolism for like 300 generations.
I don't know, like at some point, they're doing it, they're doing it, they're growing, they're growing,
and then they're like, "Okay, now I'm pooped out. I'm tired."
But those 300 generations could take like, I don't know, 40 hours.
You have like a really fast turnover.
So you can't really keep it around that long.
The way that I reuse a yeast is I will reuse it like one day to the next.
So I will, like, let's say we had coffee coming today.
I would wash that, I would save that mucilage and just add it to my next batch.
Or if I had maybe like a second tier coffee, if I had something that had less sorting,
or maybe it was a variety that I didn't love, or I knew it was not my best coffee,
coffee, I would take kind of the electrode of the second batch of my yeast and use it for that.
So I've been able to use kind of my liquid three times like at the most, kind of like each time
going to lesser grade quality if it's still using the yeast, but by that point I'm just
removing the mucilage. I'm still getting consistency, I'm still reducing defects,
but that's again using it like within the same week. So I'm not keeping a starter week to week
the week of this yeast. The other benefit of these starters, because these are not clones,
these are still a mix of a lot of different species. So when one starts to kind of slack
off, another one can kind of compensate. But the yeast and the sema, it's a clone. So it's just like
good inbreeding. You can think about that doesn't work out well long term. Lots and lots of
inbreeding of a single clone doesn't work. These starters work because they still have a lot of
diversity. So what makes them last a long time is also it doesn't make them as consistent. We're
still not hitting that same mark that we are with the clone. Yeah? Regarding uh saying that like you
could if you just want to remove mucilage you can just use bread yeast. Does bread yeast not have
I'm trying to understand the difference between the different, like a wine yeast versus a
bread yeast, and we want the primary metabolites for bread, but does it still produce secondary--?
Yeah, it does definitely still produce secondary metabolites. I'm not as familiar with what
they are, or--I'm going to say about the bread yeast--not as familiar with what they are,
are and they're definitely not as complex because if they were if there
was that commercial value it wouldn't be selling it to you for like 15 cents a
sachet so I think that in and of itself is a clue
but it's not that valuable of like a flavor additive, it's more of a functional yeast
whereas these other yeast have been developed or selected for these other
attributes but another one of your questions is what makes them different
So part of what makes them different is their preference of food, their preference of consumption.
So our bread yeast, we have our wheat, and with wine yeast we often have glucose.
So a bread yeast is not giving it fruit sugar, it's not as preferred food, so again you can also stress it out.
So I wouldn't do a long extended fermentation of that because it's like giving a vegetarian wheat.
So that's what you're kind of doing to the yeast when you're kind of switching their
metabolisms, which is why I'm not a huge fan of using beer yeast for coffee fermentations.
Like coffees and grain, because we have the coffee but what we're fermenting is the fruit.
And when we use a beer yeast that's not as adapted to consuming the fructose that we
have in fruit, that's where you have a lot of these alkylators.
So I've tried a lot of coffees that are fermented with a saison or with another beer yeast that have this cheesy, beany flavor.
For me it's just a yeast dress.
I gave them the food that they didn't love and they worked.
They're like, "I'll eat it, but I'm not happy about it."
So in Thailand, this time it's quite popular to culture the yeast from the coffee and try to have their own standard yeast.
[audience member] But even from what you said, these geese can--I mean, all of them,
we have the situation and so on, that have the time and the--it means that, I mean,
even if they have a very good geese, can you just--are they necessarily--do you have time?
Not necessarily, because when--what you're describing that they're culturing,
they're still culturing maybe 10 million.
They're not culturing one and cloning it and having that one.
So even if they're using the same starter,
that starter started out with 10 million different bees.
So it's not the same situation.
So I wouldn't be worried about it dying out or moving out.
I think you still have this situation,
where you have such a diversity, that it's going to be OK.
Yes.
I don't think that's a problem.
But if they try to isolate them,
I mean, only some species, and working with that?
- If they were able to do that,
they'd have to be like, I don't know,
five million dollar lab to be able to isolate,
replicate, and uncontaminated.
Like, it takes millions and millions and millions of dollars
to do that work, and it's very difficult.
And, like I think I mentioned this before with the yeast,
like, the reactions that it takes to just create biomass
and not prevent so that you can build up that yeast,
release so much energy that they have to be made in Denmark
so they can use the cooling snow and the water
to bring down the temperature of these giant bioreactors.
This is not, you're not gonna get there on accident.
You're not gonna accidentally only have one blown hornet.
- What's the (mumbles)
- It was such a small scale,
So I did a project with the University of Hawaii this year
because I was in a school at the time.
And so the professor and I were learning
how to implementations.
So I gave him some coffee blossoms and I was like,
maybe he can isolate some yeast for me,
so maybe I could learn that.
And it started with maybe we could just do bread
and see if it had a new part on bread flavor.
And then it turned into the bread shop
couldn't quite make it work because they were super
busy for Christmas season.
It really turned into a coffee tree.
And I think they were just able to do like a soil culture,
what we do in soil culture, throw it out on a plate,
isolate, purify it, genetically identify it,
and then grow up that colony in a broth.
But that was, I mean, it really should have had funding.
It's just they had all the tools in the lab to do it already.
And so it's not like a commercial, probably, venture.
And it was just sort of like, let's just throw out some fun things that we can do for the sake of doing it and see what happens.
And then were you able to take my culture to a coffee fermentation?
Yeah.
Cool.
Yeah, and we got some cool results from it.
Like, the cup quality wasn't coffee florals, which is like the region I knew.
It was like, "Oh, I can make it."
Even in the fragrance, not only were the coffee blossoms and everything super cool,
but it just ended up being quite extremely pretty.
Like, some of them were pretty good.
Some of them were very bad.
They were like vegetable and woody.
So there were four different ones.
And so it was like an opportunity to fail them.
And if there was a success, then that's pretty cool.
So woody is really interesting to me.
Not when you get like the papery age of coffee,
but when something is woody, it's something like
at high thresholds it's woody, and at lower thresholds
thresholds that woody is actually floral. So I think if you like it's that concentration,
if you can figure out how to get a lower concentration, I think that woody would turn
into florals. So like the compound that is jasmine is really close to woody,
just at like 1x versus 2x of that concentration. So you could still be very close.
This might be too tangible, but I can't help but like think about like how you're talking about
like say beer use not necessarily being great.
Yeah.
Because it's green.
And like feeding things what it needs.
And then like all the times you talked about how
raising wine use but we're not using it for like a final beverage.
Yeah.
And different things like that.
And then thinking about things like Rise Up as a Latest Forest
being like for soybeans and tempeh.
And like being something that's actually for the final beans, seeds, tempeh.
And could there be things like other forms of rhizobus
olympus forest that could then really be grown
in a high humid but dry environment directly
on bees that would then directly impact the bees to a greater
extent than bees can, which were kind of tangentially?
Yes.
I think so.
And especially the work that I've seen--
so I haven't done that work myself,
but Christopher Barrett has done most of it.
So his point of view is it should be done on cherry, not on green coffee.
All of this mold or the koji that we're talking about should be done on cherries
because it does have this ability to permeate and create much more of an impact
versus our yeast that we're doing are just on the outside and we're hoping that
possibly some amount, possibly maybe, gets into the coffee seed.
So it is a very indirect--
like what we're doing with coffee fermentation
is a very indirect process and very imprecise.
So I think that direction is definitely the future,
having much more penetration, having much more--
although, the other thing we were talking about
was structural integrity.
So you don't want to mess with the structural integrity too much
because then you'll have a great tasting coffee
that doesn't last at all, that has no shelf life,
that you have to consume potentially either only in producing countries
because it doesn't withstand five months of being lost in a container ship
like somewhere else.
So I think there's still a place for that.
It would just kind of be a slightly different application.
But yes, that's a really good point.
It's like we get so excited about fermentation,
but it's really minimal
and it's probably not having as much of an impact as we think it is
in the way that we're currently applying it now.
now because it's still very like amateur trying to figure it out. There are a bunch better methods.
We've had at Black & White in the last year, we've had a number of coffees that like right
when we first get them in they're super fruity, super floral, like big big flavors and like
sometimes within two or three months, sometimes even less, they like totally change, totally fall
and we end up just like, having to blend them out into, you know, some other, other uses,
um, even though like they were so, so great and different than anything else early on.
But, yeah, some of the higher impact things just don't stand up for very long. But some
of them do! And some of them like, have enhanced over time!
Yeah.
And have you noticed, for example,
after the roast, the relationship
between some of the things?
Yeah.
Yeah, for sure.
I don't have much of an opportunity
to taste coffees a lot, like far after post-roast.
But there was one, I think-- I've told a couple of people.
There was a Soudan Roumei that, when we were roasting it,
like the weeks that we were roasting it,
I didn't like it at all and thought
I didn't like Soudan Roumei.
what is this hype that everybody's--
- Everyone's insane.
- Right.
And then I found a bag three months later,
three months after roast,
and just was like, I guess I'll brew this.
And it was one of the coffees that stopped me in my traps.
It was so delicious.
Everything that everyone was talking about,
about Sudanese, but I couldn't get that,
even just two weeks after roast,
but I got it three months after roast.
- So actually this is the end of the section.
So it's a little bit shorter today
so we have to move on to our cupping.
So I'm gonna grab the neck and I think we're gonna do it here.
You may need your help kind of moving tables and moving chairs.
But let me grab them and see what's next.